---
title: "Brewing 101"
categories: beer
layout: post
date: 2017-08-30 20:30 -0500
---

### RIP Apple MBP
Just wanted to hold a moment of silence in this post for my 2011 Macbook Pro that officially died this morning. /sadface

After a lot of troubleshooting I narrowed it down to the keyboard's power button and ended up [ripping it all open](https://www.ifixit.com/Guide/MacBook+Pro+17-Inch+Unibody+Upper+Case+Replacement/3439) and [replacing the keyboard](http://www.insidemylaptop.com/how-to-replace-keyboard-on-macbook-pro-13-15-17-laptops/).  The power button did work after that and I felt a moment of accomplishment.  It continued to work up until I had to plug in the power cord to charge it.  Overnight it charged while in "hibernation" due to being idle.  Next day - nothing from the power button.  Going through all the troubleshooting - no dice.  Therefore, I'm going to conclude that there was a short going on somewhere that bricked the board when I hooked up the power and I'm moving on.  I've still got my Samsung ultrabook to keep me company.

Well - onto the brewing notes! I recently attended a brewing 101 session.  I brewed for maybe 2 years off and on but never really tried to greatly improve. This time will hopefully be different.  Key notes from the session below.

# Brew 101 Notes
## General
* Mark 5 gallons on fermenter for ease of use
* Do not use distilled water - no minerals
* Even temperatures during fermentation help yeast prevent off flavors
* Certain kinds of beer - higher fermentation temps help flavor (ie. bavarian hefeweizen and banana clove flavor)
* Think about a bag over a fermenter in case of eruption
* Avoid aluminum pots because they heat too quickly
* Don't add nuts or anything with high fat to beer
* White Vinegar can clean a copper wort chiller
* OG - if lower than expected - expect to drink beer faster.  If above, can dilute the wort before fermentation with extra water.

| Type | Hops Flavor | Grain Flavor |
|:----:|:-----------:|:------------:|
| American | Piney | Dry |
| British | Herbal/Earthy | Bread-y |
| German | Mix of above | Mix of above |
| Belgian/French | Pepper/Flower-y | Biscuit |
| New Zealand/Australia | Tropical Fruit | ------ |    
  

## Procedure
### Prep
* Everything should be "Visibility" clean
* Cleanliness is the most important thing to brewing good beer
* *CLEAN* - PBW is your friend  
	** Fermenter - 30 min soak
* *SANITIZE* - StarSan is your friend  
	** Fermenter - 30 second shake

### Brew day
* Only use cold water
* Grains into water before bringing to boil - 170 degrees max / ~20 minutes
* Cut heat when adding extract or malt
* _Don't_ squeeze the grains when removing from the kettle, just let it drip
* No need to stir hops
* Avoid boil over by removing heat, don't blow on foam
* Do not put a lid on the boil, causes off flavors
* Clarifiers are awesome, but not for all beers (ie. hefeweizen)
* Wort chiller could be added into boil near the end (5min) to sanitize, but better idea to just sanitize in solution
* Add _chilled_ water to wort after boil to bring to fermenter.  Fill to 5.25-5.5 gallons.
* Be sure to stir wort prior to OG reading after adding chilled water. Taste it and remember it for comparison post-fermination.

### Fermenting
* The sooner the fermentation begins the better.  Hopefully 12-24 hours.
* If nothing happens after 36+ hours - pitch new yeast
* If there isn't much action, check temp of the fermenter.  Should be in the mid-high end for the yeast strain ideally.

### Secondary
* After OG remains consistent for 2-3 days in a row, transfer.
* Secondary is absolutely necessary for beers with OG > 1.05
* Used to smooth out taste or add other flavors (like a dry hop)
* Try not to disturb the cake of the primary fermenter when transferring
* Dry hopping - can be done at any time during the secondary timeframe (~2 weeks)
* OG measurement - taste should be approx 75% less sweet than the original OG measurement (wort)

### Bottling
* Use corn sugar, it's the best for bottle conditioning
* Dried malt extract (DME) could be used for more bubbles, but takes longer to condition (3+ weeks)
* Stir the boiled sugar into bottling bucket for thorough mixture, gently.
* Turn the bottle to its side after capping to ensure proper seal

##### Amount of corn sugar per 5gal batch
* 4.5 oz - Bar type carbonation
* 4 oz - better for English beers
* 4.75 oz - Belgians

### Enjoyment
* 2-3 weeks to condition, max 3  
* If OG 1.030 --> Drink within 2 months
* If OG is higher --> Drink within 6 months

